well hello Ellen
very nice to see you you still he's a
mad mad mad mad mad days so many
emotions not all bad happily but it's
just so aware that among the people
listening to their summer in really
tough times right now I hope this is
going to be a beautiful hour of therapy
and help in its in its own way because
we have with us just an extraordinary
author an extraordinary mind Elizabeth
Gilbert obviously known for her Donna
Shan best-selling success with Eat Pray
Love although her favorite book from my
point of view is called big magic where
the subtitle is creative living without
beyond fear creative living beyond fear
now when you think about it that is a
pretty good agenda for today's
conversation I think this describes the
emotional landscape of our lives I think
like no one else I've I've read and I'm
not even her target audience is she's
really extraordinary in in doing that
she gave an amazing TED talk 11 years
ago now in pursuit of your creative
genius that was really it really
reframed how to think of creativity been
seen like 19 million times or something
and it's really changed how a lot of
people they're just open to the creative
genius coming from the outside so it's a
delight to welcome to the TED connect
stage and as with Gilbert hey Chris
great to see you how are you where are
you are you who you living with or
staying with what's up I'm fine
I don't want to brag but I'm in New
Jersey um where anybody would want to be
I'm by myself I've got a little house
out in the country and I've I'm think
I'm on day 17 of no human contact
other than virtually and I'm well I'm
not anybody who you need to be worrying
about right now so I'm good
Wow well so you're in a way or you're
having a relation experience to what so
many people are having I mean there's a
days of isolation for many people and
and that brings with it lots of
difficult emotions in a way and we're
gonna we're going to go through many of
them I hope in the next hours I'm I'm
hoping to talk with you about Lizzy I
write down a list here about anxiety
loneliness
hurry also tea be a tivity
procrastination brief connection and
hope how about that that's our agenda
are you up for that buffet just a little
light tasting menu of all the massive
human emotions let's do it absolutely
I think I think it's probably good to
dive straight in with the anxiety that I
know a lot of people are feeling right
now so many reasons to be anxious both
for yourself your loved ones and just
for this time and for the world and how
we all get through this have you been
feeling anxiety and there's and how how
do you think of it what can you say to
us I have been and I think you would
have to be either a sociopath or totally
enlightened not to be feeling anxiety at
a moment like this so I would say that
the the first thing I would want to
encourage everybody to do is to give
themselves a measure of mercy and
compassion or the difficult emotions
that you're feeling right now they're
extremely understandable I think
sometimes our emotions about our
emotions become a bigger problem so if
you're feeling frightened and anxious
and then you're layering shame on top of
that because you feel like you should be
handling it better or you should be
doing your isolation better or you
should be creating more while you're
alone or you should be serving the world
in some better way now you've just
multiplied the suffering right so I
think that the antidote for that first
of all is just a really warm loving dose
of compassion and mercy towards yourself
because this is if you're if you're an
anxiety you're a person who is suffering
right now
and that deserves a show of mercy the
second thing that I would say about
anxiety is this that here's what I think
is the central paradox of the human
emotional landscape that I'm finding
particularly fascinating right this
moment and it's really come to light for
me so there are these two aspects of
humanity that don't match and hence the
word paradox but they're they really
define us and the first is that there is
no species on earth more anxious than
humans it's a hallmark of our species
because we have the ability / curse to
imagine a future and also once you've
lived on earth for a little while you
have the experience to recognize this
terrifying piece of information which is
that literally anything can happen at
literally any moment - literally any
person and because we have these vast
rich colorful imaginations we can see
all sorts of terrifying movies in our
heads about all of the possibilities and
all the scariest things that could occur
and actually one of the scariest things
that could occur is occurring it's
something that people have imagined in
fiction and imagined in science and
that's actually happening right now so
that's quite terrifying
the paradox is that in that level we're
very bad emotionally at fear and anxiety
because we we stir ourselves up to a
very heated degree because of our
imaginations about how horrible can get
and it can get very horrible but we can
imagine it even worse the paradox is
that we're also the most capable
resourceful and resilient species that
has ever lived on earth though history
has shown that when change comes to
humanity either on the global level like
it's happening now or on the personal
level we're really good at it
we're really good at adaptation and and
I think that if we can remember that it
can help to actually mitigate the fear
and you can remember it in a historical
perspective by looking at what humanity
has gone through and what we have not
only survived but figured out how to
thrive through and you can also look at
it at a personal level or you can make
an inventory of what you yourself have
survived and notice as I often notice my
panic in my anxiety about the imagined
future is is
Deadly on my nervous system but I
actually have discovered that when
there's an actual emergency in the
moment I tend to be pretty good at it
and I think most of us are like that um
you'll see that repeated in history and
so many examples I think about the those
heartbreaking and devastating phone
messages that people were leaving for
their loved ones from the towers on
September 11th and you can hear the calm
the common people's voices the biggest
emergency ever was happening and in that
moment intuition told them what to do
the important thing to do now is to make
this phone call and I think if you can
trust that when the point of emergency
actually arrives you'll be able to meet
it and then when the world changes
you'll be able to adapt to it it
certainly helps me calm down I mean I
guess there's a reason why fear is there
you know I didn't just evolve by
accident it's supposed to direct our
behavior and help us avoid danger and
and it's just that sometimes it gets out
of control and actually gets gets in our
way and damages us I mean any any
specific advice and like hell someone
could turn their fear into something
useful at this moment can I tell you a
story that then I'm using as a
touchstone for myself right now and
drawing wonder and and inspiration from
so some of you may have heard of a young
woman named Amanda eller she was in the
news recently because she got lost in
Hawaii in the wilderness for seventeen
days and there was a massive massive
hunt for her because she had left her
car she'd gone for a simple hike had
left her phone in her car went off of
the woods took a wrong turn and then had
this disastrous 17 days I fell off a
cliff broke her leg walked for 40 miles
on a broken knee lost her shoes in a
flash flood she had to sleep packed in
mud in order to protect herself from the
cold in the mosquito she was eating
Maude's I mean just harrowing story of
survival
I met her recently and she was so lit
and radiant with this kind of serenity
and this kind of Wonder and joy and I
and I said how are you like this
you know you went through one of the
most traumatizing things that a person
could go through but well first of all
like I discovered that I can survive
anything going back to this idea of how
resourceful and adaptive humans actually
are but the piece of her story that I am
just using like a life to a life raft
right now is that she said on her second
day in the jungle when she realized that
she was truly and very much in trouble
and she'd already spent one night in the
woods and she's completely lost and
she's totally alone and no one knew
where she was and she was full of terror
she said she closed her eyes and she
prayed or asked a request
she made a wish to herself to
consciousness to the universe and she
said please take my fear away and when I
opened my eyes have it be gone and have
it be gone and have it not come back and
I opened her eyes and it was gone and it
was replaced by intuition and I think
intuition is a little bit the opposite
of fear because fear is the terror that
you feel about a frightening imagined
future intuition can only happen when
you're in the moment and so from that
point forward she did not experience
fear for the rest of the time she was in
the woods he just was guided by some
deep intuitive sense located somewhere
in between her sternum and her navel and
in every moment she would ask it right
or left up or down eat this don't eat
this and in industry and just trust it
complete absolute surrender to the
intuition of the moment and and she said
it hasn't returned the the fear hasn't
returned and she still guides her life
that way though it's a return to some
sense that there's a navigational system
within you that will if you stay present
in this actual moment tell you what to
do one moment to the next
now if you want to suffer up out of the
moment and imagine a future and then you
can suffer indefinitely and so it is
almost almost like a spiritual or
meditation practice and anybody out
there who's done any spiritual and
meditation practices this is what you
were practicing for you're practicing
for this moment and those of you who
haven't tried that this might be a
really interesting be centered in the
instance wow that's
remarkable Tori and I I guess what I'm
hearing is it's two things it's one just
like the reaching out to the universe
there but but specifically there was a
decision to let go of the future and
just to focus on on the moment that's it
nothing will bring you more pain than
the future and I see what I'm seeing
happening right now he said this to you
the other day Chris is you know there's
a relatively small percentage of the
population who will suffer physically
from this disease and there's a larger
percentage who are going to suffer
economically from it but then there's
this massive uncountable number of
people who will and are suffering from
it emotionally and right now those
people are my concern because they're
really in pain and there's millions and
millions so you're living that by
yourself
Liz and many others are in that same
circumstance right now I suspect some
are feeling like crushing loneliness but
talk about that too how do you handle
loneliness in a situation like this when
it's so alien to everything that we as
the social species are usually about we
crave other people we crave touch we
crave hugs we want to be there with
people how how can we avoid this being a
period of crushing loneliness I don't
think you can avoid it but I think you
can walk toward it and I think that for
me I've deliberately many times in my
life gone off into isolation in order to
face those things I've gone on long
meditation retreats I just this this
year I was in India and I spent 17 days
alone with no contact with anybody which
was a weird practice run for what's
happening right now and I see as I see
people really losing it and and feeling
like they're crawling out of their skin
either from anxiety fear boredom anger
blame loneliness depression you know all
of these things that come up when you
are forced to just be in your own
presence I know all of those feelings
because as a meditator I've experienced
all of those in stillness it's the
hardest person in the
world to be with is yourself and so the
only way that I learned as a meditator
to be able to survive and endure my own
company was with universal human
compassion toward me and to recognize
this is a person who's suffering right
now from loneliness and this person
needs kindness from south towards self
and it's a very high teaching but I
think that it's a very interesting
moment to practice that and and so what
I would I would suggest to people and
again this takes a certain amount of
resolve and it takes a certain amount of
curiosity about learning more about the
human experience what I'm seeing people
do is people are spinning away from that
isolation because they're so terrified
of it what happened with the world right
now is that basically all of our
pacifiers were yanked out of our mouths
everything that we ever can do and reach
for that can get us out of having to be
in the existential crisis of being along
with ourselves was taken away and I see
people rushing to fill it I mean
constant zoom meetings and constant
parties online and constant interaction
and all of that is lovely but my from a
spiritual and psychological standpoint
from a creative standpoint I would say
if you have any curiosity about this
don't be in such a hurry to rush away
from an experience that could actually
transform your life I think sometimes
the experiences that can transform us
the most intimately are the ones that we
want to run away and I think of a story
that the Dalai Lama told about one of
his teachers and he's sort of it when
the Chinese invaded Tibet and all the
monks were running into India for safety
one of his teachers who was one of the
great masters the last glimpse that the
Dalai Lama had of him was that he was
walking into China very patiently and
very slowly to ward it you know
everybody else was running away from it
he was walking toward it and I think
there's a level at which first
responders do that and then in the real
world in an intimate way they go into
the emergency they go toward the
emergency all the people who are trying
to solve this now and worldly ways are
walking toward the emergency but there's
a way that you can do it emotionally as
well and that is to walk with curiosity
and with an open mind to award your most
difficult and painful motions without
resistance
and say what is it like for a person to
feel like they don't have something to
do for an hour oh and you can open up
your compassion in that there's so many
lessons and compassion that can be found
here how about a general universal mercy
that we can all feel toward people who
are in solitary confinement
let's have that be part of the
conversation now you've experienced it
for two days in your own house maybe
it's time to change the prison system do
you see how hard this is or you can have
compassion toward people who've lost a
love flowing in there alone you can open
up by feeling your own feelings you can
open up your feelings more universally
toward the world so I think there's a
great opportunity here for growth on the
personal level but you have to have just
the almost like a whimsical curiosity to
be the one walking into China rather
than the one away from it and that's how
I'm doing it
so let's let's follow up on that word
curiosity that you've used a few times
there I mean a lot of wisdom that I've
heard sort of thrown around online right
now is this is a great time to follow
your passion and you know dive deep into
whatever it is you've most been wanting
to do I mean in big magic you made an
argument that the following your passion
isn't necessarily the wisest strategy
you argued no don't do that follow
curiosity does that apply now make that
case yeah you know I've been on a
personal crusade to rid the world of the
word passion because I feel like as an
instruction for people on how they
should be living because I know that in
my case it brings me nothing but anxiety
purpose is another one um that has
become a cudgel that we use to bludgeon
ourselves into thinking that we're not
doing enough or that we're not doing
life right or that you're supposed to be
more useful and more productive you're
supposed to be changing the world
you're supposed to be uncovering some
particular talent that only you have and
with it you're supposed to then
transform everybody and monetize it no
pressure you know I start to get hives
even repeating that but that's the
cultural that's what we've been taught
you know that's what we've been taught
is the purpose and passion are
everything I would like to replace it
with a far gentler word and I think
curiosity is very gentle because the
stakes are so much lower the stakes of
passions say you have to shave your head
and move to India and
you know get rid of all your possessions
and and start a startup like what it's
so it's so intense but curiosity is a
very simple universal experience that
causes you to want to look at something
just a tiny bit closer and you don't
have to change your life around it you
just look and it might be taking weekend
to try something new for a little while
it's it's a it's a mild it's almost so
easily missed and I think so many times
were looking way up at the sky for the
sign from God about our passion and our
purpose is supposed to be and meanwhile
there's this lovely little bread trail
crumbs of bread crumbs of curiosity that
if you can slow down and again this is
about not rushing out of the experience
of being silent still and alone you can
slow down you might be able to see them
but if I could save one thing that I'm
noticing is an obstacle right now
because I think a lot of people thought
oh isolation great this is the perfect
time for me to learn Italian and take
that calligraphy class and start writing
that novel and they find that they're
actually sort of in a paralysis of
anxiety and they're not creating
anything or doing anything first of all
again like a blanket of mercy on you
these are hard times and it might take
you a minute and your nervous system and
in your mind to adjust to the new
reality but the second thing I would say
is that when people are saying they're
having trouble with their creativity
because they're in isolation
I might daringly suggest that perhaps
you're not in enough isolation and by
that I mean are you monitoring how much
external stimulus you're bringing of
this disaster into your home so if you
are sitting watching the news all day
what you're doing is you're bringing the
disaster into your workspace you're
bringing it into your soul you're
bringing it into your mind and you're
gonna create tremendous misete of a
creative environment an environment of
fear panic and urgency so I think if
you're going to be a good steward of
your creativity right now you have to
isolate a little bit from the news and
that doesn't mean disconnecting it means
I get up every morning and after I've
meditated I read the New York Times and
I give myself 40 minutes with it and
then that's it for the day because I
know that if I bring in any more I'm
gonna go into a traumatized state and
then I won't be able to
my intuition I won't be able to help
people because I myself will be
suffering and I won't be able to be
present for this very interesting moment
in my life and in history and I want to
remain present for it as much as I can
so there's a discipline being a good
steward of your senses and deciding what
you're going to put your senses in front
of hello this is an outpouring on
Facebook of gratitude for you people are
so grateful and grateful for the calm
that you are instilling in us all so
thank you for from them and from me
we've also had a number of questions
about grief we're kind of dealing with
grief at a different scale at the moment
one person has already lost five people
to coronavirus and so any thoughts of
how to manage grief at the scale or how
to kind of process this in a way that
honors both them and yourself first of
all my condolences and I think any words
that I would say about somebody who just
lost five family members could only be
inadequate grief is bigger than us it's
bigger than your efforts to manage it
and if you want to hold yourself and
your family members compassionately
through grief you have to allow that it
cannot be managed um and I think that
grief management is something that we've
we've kind of created in our very
Western idea that if we can figure out
something we can avoid suffering from it
so if we can figure out how to translate
grief and if we can figure out how to
walk through grief then we won't have to
experience the magnitude of it um many
of you know that I lost the love of my
life two years ago from from pancreatic
and liver cancer and I was with her when
she died and and I've been walking
through my own path of grief so I know
what it feels like to lose the person in
the world who's the most important to
you which is of course the biggest fear
that we all have I know that you can
survive it but I know that you survive
it by allowing yourself to feel it and
again to go back to the metaphor of the
monk walking
directly into China into conflict rather
than away from it do you have the the
courage to let it break over you like
waves I wish I could remember her name
there's this there's this extraordinary
woman who wrote a book called here if I
need you and she's a chaplain for the
police department in in Maine and she's
in charge of knocking on people's doors
and giving them the worst news that
they're ever gonna hear in their life
when she goes with the police when
something happens and she told a story
once that I found very moving and very
helpful for me in my grief he said what
she witnessed through years and years of
sitting with people through what is
literally the worst moment of their life
the the nightmare about loss is that
when she knocks on that door and tells
that person you're your daughter your
family member your husband your mother
has been killed there's this Universal
collapse where the person will just be
it is the tidal wave that comes and just
takes you down and you lose all
civilization you lose all your
attainments all your wisdom
nothing can stand up to that you
literally go to the floor and and you
sob and you grieve and you and she holds
them through that and then she said that
what she's learned is the most
astonishing thing that that never lasts
more than a half an hour that first wave
it can't you actually physiologically
can't sustain that and and if you let it
break over you and you just allow it
then within a half an hour usually
sooner and she said this has happened
every single time she's been with
somebody with a loved one's death the
very next thing that happens is that
that person comes down they catch a
breath and the next question they ask is
a very reasonable question where is the
body what do we do next when can we have
the funeral who else was in the car and
that with that question she says they
start to rebuild their new life already
with this new piece of information that
even ten even an hour ago would have
seemed unsurvivable and she uses that as
an example of once again the tremendous
psychological resilience of the human
being and it doesn't mean that they will
never grieve again it doesn't mean that
they're grieving journey is over
it just means that somewhere in their
mind it's landed and now already they're
making a plan about okay who do we need
to notify what's the next thing we need
to do and again if you can remember this
as you go through your panic if you can
remember that in the moment of emergency
there will be an intuitive deep sense
that will tell you there's going to be
some next steps and it's time for us to
take those next steps and if you can
also remember that resilience is our
shared genetic and psychological
inheritance we are each and every one of
us no matter how anxious you feel you
are no matter how written by feel
youthful you are every single one of us
is the genetic survivor of hundreds of
thousands of years of survivors like we
are all each one of us came from a line
of people who made the next direct
intuitive move survived incredibly
difficult things and were able to pass
their genes on so almost at a biological
level you can relax into a trust that
when the moment comes where you will be
faced with the biggest challenge you
will be able to draw on a deep reservoir
of shared human consciousness that will
say now it's time to make the next move
and we can do this so beautiful so many
more questions I will be back thanks
thank you I think the author's name was
Kate brace trope and I guess it's a book
if you if you need a book right now here
if you need me by Kate bury strowman
yeah there's you and I got to have a
conversation a few a few months after
Raya passed away I was actually the
first ever episode of the Ted interview
podcast we did and I found that it was
pretty my favorite episode ever the Ted
interview like it was it was so moving
what you how you spoke about your grief
then and and I feel like that's a
potential resource to people I know we
were both sitting there shedding tears
and I you know I I I found that an
extraordinary experience personally to
be sure but somehow
in this moment you know if if you follow
this journey of curiosity if you walk
towards some of the harder moments do
you think that this actually can be a
creative time for people if they're if
they're willing to do that absolutely
and I think it can be and I don't think
creativity in this case has to
necessarily mean that you write the
Great American Novel or start that
business you always intended to start it
doesn't need to be so literal it's we're
going to be creating new worlds and new
lives on the other side of this and
we're going to be doing that
individually and we're going to be doing
that collectively it's I think of the
shoots of small trees that can only come
up after massive forest fires you know
where where a seed pods have to explode
under great eat we're in a kind of
crucible moment right now and I wouldn't
begin to have the hubris to predict what
sort of creativity will come but if look
if history is any measure what we'll
probably see is people at their best and
people at their worst but I think we'll
see more of people at their best because
that's typically how it works I mean
your model of how creativity happens is
is that it doesn't all come from within
it's not like you have to sit there
saying okay this is my moment to be
creative come on be creative be creative
it's but it involves fundamentally an
openness to something coming to you to
be to be you know open to be curious
listening but then choose to be open to
that moment I mean perhaps perhaps that
could apply even more now than ever just
because we have this almost some of the
external I mean we have this huge
extract distraction of the news some
other distractions are taken away is
there a chance that if people listened
they actually can receive more at this
moment I think so and I think again
there's if you stop thinking about your
self isolation and your social
distancing as quarantine and you start
thinking of it as a retreat
um you'll find that you can't really
tell the difference between quarantine
and retreat you know a lot of you out
there have dreamed I've heard you
because I talked about going to India to
an ashram for four months and god I
can't tell you how many years people
have heard saying I wish I could do that
I'm like well you're you got it
and and by the way this is what it felt
like this is what it felt like you know
to learn how to present with yourself I
think my ring needs to move bit to learn
how to be present with yourself means
sitting in a lot of Terror sitting in a
lot of anxiety sitting in a lot of fear
sitting a lot of pain and and and being
able to allow that without having to
resist it without having to reach
outside yourself for something to numb
yourself with um I also want to tell a
story that a friend of mine my friend
Martha back told me about when she goes
to South African and and teaches animal
tracking horses and she works with all
these great African animal trackers and
these old men who have been had these
skills passed down for generations and
she was using it as an example of the
difference between focus and openness
though I think sometimes the mistake
that people make when they want to be
creative is they think they have to get
really focused um and focus is a
anxiety-producing energy as well you
know you get a drill down and you can
you can feel your whole body tense but
what she described witnessing in these
animal trackers is when they go out to
hunt lions these old old men the very
first thing they do is they sit down
against a tree and they appear to go to
sleep but um they drop into a state that
she calls and that the Mystics call
wordless oneness and wordless oneness
you can also call meditation you can
also call it the zone but it's a
stillness where you actually can drop
your nervous system into such a quiet
place that you have 360 degree awareness
of your senses and of presence and
they'll sit like that apparently doing
nothing for an extremely long time just
looking at half-witted eyes to the world
and then maybe an hour two hours and all
of a sudden I'll say the lines over
there you know and and so for me I've
learned old my creative wishes lightly
in that same way I'm between books right
now and I don't have an idea for a book
and in the past that would have made me
really anxious but now I know take a lot
of naps go for a lot of walks do a lot
of drawings and doing like weird little
art projects as I'm sitting here to like
distract my mind bring that back bring
that back hung it up
aren't they dear I'm just like playing
with color and texture because it calms
me and I think if you can't think of
what to do right now I would suggest
doing what you used to do when you were
10 years old that made you feel happy
and relaxed and that's often creativity
in playing and for many of us who are
anxious children and I was an anxious
child we learned at an early age that we
could sedate ourselves with our
curiosity and with our play and then
usually around adolescence the world
taught us that there were faster and
more immediate ways to bump out of that
anxiety through stacks or substances or
distraction or workaholism or whatever
we did and not have to sit with
ourselves and I think right now is a
really good opportunity to you were you
actually are on the right track when you
were 10 whatever it was so you know get
some Legos get some Legos get some
coloring books just get your hands in
the mud do do whatever it is that will
actually ground you into this again to
take you out of future izing and the
future tripping that's gonna cause you
nothing but anxiety and not going to
make you be of service um you know
there's such a thing too that I just
want to touch on if I can for a minute
about empathetic overload and empathetic
meltdown
we're taught that empathy is a good
thing I would suggest that in a case
this dramatic what you want to talk
about replacing empathy with is
compassion and the difference is
extremely important so compassion means
I'm actually not suffering right now you
are I see you're suffering and I want to
help you that's what compassion is
empathy is
you're suffering and now I'm suffering
because you're suffering so now we have
two people suffering and nobody who can
serve and nobody who can be of help and
if you knew how your empathetic
suffering it actually makes you into
another patient who needs assistance you
would be more willing to dip into
compassion and what what underlies
compassion is the virtue of courage the
the courage to be able to sit with and
witness somebody else's pain without
inhabiting it yourself so much that you
become another person who is suffering
and now there are no helpers
and it takes an inocent of courage to be
able to to watch that without diving
into it and joining it and becoming sick
yourself
I mean if empathy is just the feeling
there's compassion your use of
compassion imply that is turning that
feeling into something potentially
practical to actually do something if
you can for for that person it's
recognizing that if I feel your pain I
can't help you in your pain because now
my pain has taken over me and and I
think that sometimes I think all you
need to do is know that and it makes you
turn the ship right one of my favorite
teachers Byron Katie says my favorite
thing about my suffering is that it
isn't yours
my favorite thing about my suffering is
that it isn't yours my favorite thing
about your suffering is that it isn't
mine so it will be eventually we all
take a turn suffering you cannot move
through this earth without it when it's
your turn you'll know when it's not your
turn stay out of that field of somebody
else's pain because you can't help them
when you're in pain yourself and then
see if you can find the inner resolve
and courage and I think some of that is
just based on accepting you know the
Buddhist first noble truth which is that
the suffering is an unavoidable aspect
of life on earth we're all going to be
in it at some point we've all been in it
at some point and now how can I help
it's it's not saying this is easy
I'm just saying also if you're suffering
from empathetic overload and empathetic
meltdown which means your adrenals are
up your stress is up your endorphins are
down you're going into a parasympathetic
collapse this would be another time to
discipline yourself to stay away from
the new
and because you will have a breakdown
and you won't be able to help the people
around you who are the people who need
help but have you seen any signs that if
someone takes that empathy and
compassion let's say and and decides to
act in some way may big or small on
behalf of similar that that actually
shifts how they they feel that there's
that there's a healthiness to that or or
is that the language of just inducing
more guilt in people well I think
there's a beautiful healthiness that can
come from being of service and and and
that's also how I've been medicating my
anxiety through this is by showing up in
ways that I can with whatever resources
I've got here's what you have to keep in
mind though and this is what I keep
reminding people um right now in my own
personal sphere there is more need than
I have resources to do to fix so I have
to begin with that reality and I have to
have the courage to sit in that reality
soberly and acknowledge that that's the
case the second thing I think emotional
sobriety would require of me right now
is to recognize that this is going to be
a marathon not a sprint
and so the first week of the crisis I
had this deluge of all my really
energized
let's save the world friends all my
creative friends everybody was emailing
texting zooming and they all had a
response let's do this let's do this
let's fix it this way and I found myself
joining with some of them and not
joining with others just again based on
my intuition but I also find myself
cautioning them guys this is this is a
marathon we're in mile one of what's
going to be a very long marathon so pace
yourselves and pace your resources don't
over give to the point where you
collapse because we're still gonna need
helpers two months from now and we're
still gonna need helpers and and so find
a steady pace and be and be willing to
be in it for the entire long haul
yeah Pelin such great advisors and so
many questions pouring in one of them is
from a therapist who confesses that she
and many of her clients are having
trouble with the letting go of control
in this moment and wonders if you have
any advice on how to let go of control
in order to be willing to feel
everything that we're enduring just this
[Music]
this sense that you had that you had
control was a myth to begin with and
that may not be comforting except that I
find it very comforting you know control
is an illusion and and there are times
where we're able to fool ourselves
because we're so good at technology and
we're so good at creating safe worlds
were able to trick ourselves into
believing that we're in control of any
of this but but we're not and and the
paradox for me of surrender is how
relaxing it is nobody ever wants to
surrender because nobody wants to lose
control but if you recognize that you
never had control all you ever had was
anxiety and and then you let go of the
myth of control you'll find that I find
that if I even say that sentence I'm
losing control and was in control then I
remind myself that you you never had
control all you had was anxiety and
that's what you're having right now um
so you're not letting go of anything you
know surrender means letting go of
something you never even have um so so
there's an there's an awakening that's
happening right now where what's
happening is not that you're losing
control what's happening is that for the
first time you're noticing that you
never had it and the world is doing its
job the job of the world is to change
instantly and sometimes radically and
sometimes immediately and it's doing it
and and that is also the normal things
um and and again we're adaptive and
we're resilient and we can handle it but
don't I don't kid myself for a minute to
think that I'm in control of a that's
ever happening my realm of control is
leagues
it's usually about like might be able to
go get a glass of water right now like
it's there's enough a lot there's not a
lot that I'm in control of and I'm
actually I've ever been online if I may
and then I will jump off again you know
Chris you and I we're all in a pretty
privileged position ted has been able to
go remote we're able to work remotely
but many many many millions of people in
the US and Beyond are not able to to do
that and people are really suffering how
but how how can we help what are your
thoughts about people who are not able
to socially distance we're not able who
are losing their jobs the kind of the
kind of the global catastrophe that is
unveiling how can we think about that in
a humane compassionate way it's it's
crushing and again as with the same case
of the person who said they had lost
five family members I I can't
sitting in this position of comfort and
safety say anything that I think is
going to be accurate and appropriate to
that other than to say that I just think
of this Indian proverb that I keep going
back to which is I store my grain in the
belly of my neighbor you know Western
capitalistic society has taught and
trained us to hoard long before this
long before this happened in people were
hoarding toilet paper and canned goods
advertising and the whole capitalist
model has taught us scarcity it's taught
us that do you have to be surrounded by
abundance in order to be safe the
disconnect between those who have and
those who have not has never been bigger
and you know never in my lifetime then
probably in any of our lifetimes has
there been an invitation again to
release the stranglehold on your
hoarding this is this is not the time
for hoarding this is the time to store
your grain in the belly of your neighbor
in a way that is emotionally sober and
accurate to what you can give and and to
look at that and in a in a really honest
way
to not put your own family in danger to
not put yourself in crisis but to be
able to say what can i what can I offer
in in the immediacy and and and then in
the longer term a conversation about
redistribution of resources and and why
do so few have so much and why do so
many have the little and but that's not
a conversation I can fix today that's
again outside of my realm of control but
what I can do is unleash the
white-knuckled rip that I have on what's
mine and make sure that I'm going into
the world with an open hand again not it
not a panicked open hand or I'm going to
destroy myself to save something else
because then there will be no helper
left but in a reasonable way I cannot
save everybody I can save a few and and
that's the this the tragic but I think
still burning reality that then I can
offer right now and again underlying all
of that undergirding all of that as a
recognition that anything that I have to
say about people who are in
extraordinary suffering right now is not
enough I'll be back thank you thanks
let's talk to me a minute about anger
like I I think a lot of just just from
the conversation we just had or just
listen to there you know there are so
many reasons to feel angry right now
about what's going on but and part of me
feels we we should be you know that this
is that that's what anger is for it's
too it's too
I like things that are unjust and unfair
and that we must pay attention to and
yet part of me is honestly scared of it
I think there could there there there
could be an eruption of anger that's
dangerous both personally and and for
society to have you felt anger what what
are you doing with it I feel anger at
every White House press conference and I
think all all thinking people do you
know there's there's I felt angry that
this wasn't taken more seriously early
on I feel angry at myself but I didn't
take it more seriously
early on um you know as much as I feel
contempt and disgust for government
officials who I feel were slow to
recognize how serious this is
I also have to be really candid that
three weeks ago I was one of the people
walking around saying why is everybody
overreacting to to this so much right so
I think that there are we also have to
own our own piece of that and and I
think there are rolling waves of
awakening that are happening in people
and so a lot of anger I feel right now
is for people who aren't taking this
seriously enough who are Quarantine
emselves who are putting other people in
danger but a month ago that was me I was
in the Hong Kong Airport sort of
sallying through the Hong Kong Airport
while everybody was hurrying around in
masks and gloves and I was like what
what's the big deal it's everybody so
you know it takes it takes people as
long as it takes them to come to
awakening and some people we have to
also acknowledge never will anger has
its place um and I think that righteous
anger which is the kind of anger that
says a violation has occurred here um a
humanitarian violation is occurring here
can be very stirring for transformation
um again it's how comfortable can you be
sitting with these existing emotions and
what are you going to do with your ink
I'm gonna laugh at the people who you're
quarantined with are you gonna go on
Twitter rants is that useful is that
productive and and so I think there's a
you know the again I keep using the
words emotional sobriety but the the
emotional sobriety that would be
required is to feel that anger
acknowledge it to show yourself mercy
for how uncomfortable it is and then to
steadily recognizing again that this is
a marathon not a sprint
do what you reasonably can do to change
the situation
I mean the part of me that's constantly
looking for the better narrative hopes
that the anger we feel now could almost
displace some of I mean that the world's
been an angry place for the last couple
years there's been so much anger
inflamed online we've made each other
angry often probably unnecessarily
outraged sparking outrage and disgust et
cetera I mean is there any hope that
that this is a bit of massive societal
shaking up it's like don't be so silly
look at what actually matters here and
that we can at least focus more
attention onto the things that yes some
things that we really should be angry
about but other things that maybe no can
lead people to say human connection it
really matters in this moment we you
know from people from all sides we need
each other we just have to use this as a
moment when we come together how how do
you think about that like how do we turn
some of these negative emotions into a
force for good that at least gives us
some permission to hope that something
special comes out of all this I think
you have to give yourself permission to
hope and I thought and I don't think
it's unreasonable to give yourself
permission to hope because again our
resilience our resourcefulness and the
way that history has shown how
catastrophe can lead to transformation
gives us actually I think reasonable
cause to hope one thing that I'm
noticing that I'm a little bit amused by
is that when people start predicting
what the post pandemic world is gonna be
I noticed that their predictions seem to
be suspiciously in exact alignment with
their personal worldview so my friends
who are utopians are already you know
living in this utopian future where you
know this is gonna be the big this is
going to be the big change my friends
who are dystopian are already predicting
you know that this is the official
beginning of the police state and the
new the disastrous New World Order it's
yeah I think there's a lot of hubris and
trying to imagine what that new world
could be a quote that I love that a
friend of mine always says is when
people aren't busy being the worst
they're the best and and I think that
gives me hope
and it's true the other way too when
people are busy being the best they're
the worst but yeah I think it's I'm
terrible at social engineering Chris you
know and you know this and you have
great better minds than mine who can
come on and talk about this on the
global scale you know that the only
world that I have a really intimate
familiar engagement with is this one and
on the individual level what I
understand is that the only world that
any of us are ever gonna live in is this
one and so minding this and learning how
to learning how to calm this how to open
this how to get on the other side of the
emotions that are causing harm to you
and others is that's my work you know
well you're an extraordinary storyteller
and you already told us one amazing
story earlier on she has have you come
across any other recent stories that
have given you reason for hope perhaps
well I'll give you one and and this one
this one I delight in years ago twenty
years ago in New York City I was friends
with thirty years ago I was in my 20s I
was friends with a woman named Winifred
who was in her 90s she was this really
cool West Village bohemian artist who
had lived in Greenwich Village for her
entire life had had very storied and
checkered and wild life surrounding
herself boy intellectuals and poets and
artists and adventurer and she'd had a
lot of loss and a lot of gain and and
she was this extremely passionate person
who had friends of all ages which was
something I admired about her like I was
friends with her I was 25 she was 95 but
we would I would call her my very good
friend and she had a lot of friends at
bars she was so open to everything and
at her 95th birthday party
I asked her what have you learned more
than anything else because she was such
a creature of learning I wrote about her
in big mad
she was somebody who I said to her one
time what's your favorite book that
you've ever read and she said I can't
say my favorite book because there's
been so many but I can tell you my
favorite subject which is the history of
ancient Mesopotamia which I started
learning when I was 80 and it changed my
life and it did she'd gone on these
expeditions to Jordan and Iraq and she's
just so full of a rule of living you
know and and I said to her what you know
what have you learned in all of your
experiences and all you what is the most
central thing that you've learned and
she said human beings can adapt to
anything human beings can adapt to
absolutely anything and then she said
this great line if Martians landed on
earth tomorrow it would be off the front
pages of the newspaper by next Tuesday
we would already be used to it right and
there's a level at which I'm seeing this
adaptation happening and that is both a
good and a bad thing right we can get
used to totalitarianism but we can also
get used you know we can get too used to
I've gotten used to a world without my
my the love of my life in it we can
adapt and and I keep using that line as
a touchstone for myself because I don't
know nor do I presume to know what the
world is going to be after this I know
that it will be different from the one
before I also just have to point out
that all y'all had a lot of complaints
about the world we had before and I do a
lot of talking I do a lot of going
around the world and I do any one of you
raising your hand in any of the seminars
I've taught over the last years and
saying we are in a golden age and I'm so
grateful and appreciative for all that I
have now you want that world back right
so let's actually remember that as we go
forward that this moment for some of us
that were in right now might be one that
we look back later and say well actually
that was pretty good and I didn't have
any gratitude for um you know so
personally I'm just hoping that and an
intimate level and again this is not on
a socio-economic global political level
but it's an invitation to actually be
grateful for the safety that you have
and the people that you have and and
maybe carry that forward a little bit
maybe we're really good at
getting like once the crisis is over
we're really good at forgetting our
gratitude it's one of our great gifts
you might want to make a note actually
try to be grateful for what you can
thank you guys I think we have a last
question from online friends yeah what
crisis right soul is just a request for
a concrete strategy to try and reduce
the fear or the shame that is coming at
this moment I'll give you mine and I it
may feel weird and out of reach and we
will but I'm beyond that at this point
and and it has a game changer and a life
changer for me I have a 20 year long
practice of writing myself every day a
letter from love now this may not feel
concrete it may feel very Airy but what
it does is that it helps me through my
anxiety and I needed every single day
because I'm anxious every single day I
wake up frightened every day I wake up
shamed every day I wake up angry every
day all of the difficult emotions that
run through the software of human
consciousness are running through my
software all the time and they cause me
pain and they cause me fear and they
cause me distress and they make me sick
so 20 years ago when I was going through
a very bad divorce and the depression I
began this tactic and the tactic is that
I will sit down with a notebook and I
will write to myself from myself a
letter from love and what I mean by love
is not romantic love it's the infinite
bottomless ly merciful source of all
human compassion and every single one of
these letters begins the same way it
says it starts with me saying I need you
it's a dialogue it starts with me saying
I need you and love saying I'm right
here and then I say what I'm going to
really angry right now I'm terrified I'm
spinning I can't sleep I'm anxious and
then I just allow to come through my
hand whatever if you could imagine the
most loving compassionate merciful voice
in the world if they were in the room
with you what would you want them to say
and you say that to yourself
and so for me that usually is a
combination of these sorts of phrases
I've got you I'm right here I see how
distressed you are it's all right I
don't need you to feel better um I think
a lot of our anxiety is that we want to
get out of that feeling as fast as we
can and what love always says to me is
it makes no difference to me whether
you're anxious or afraid or angry or
hurt I'm with you and I'll be with you
through this entire thing for however
long it takes I'm not going anywhere
I've gotten nowhere better to be right
now I mean sitting with you loving you
I'll be with you at the moment of your
death I was here with you at the moment
of your birth there's nothing you can do
to lose me you can't fail you can't do
this wrong you are infinitely bottomless
Lee loved and it's so interesting to me
that the opposite of fear in my life and
my emotional landscape on the color
palette the opposite of fear is
encouraged the opposite of fears is
loved and and that presents a sense of
I've got you right which is the thing
that we all want somebody to say I've
got you and it's going to be all right I
would love to know neurologically what
actually happens in my mind when I do
this but what happens to me
physiologically is that my mind just
hearing those words and seeing those
words petals and then from there I'm
able to take the next intuitive right
action the best that I can
there's some you can say no to this and
it may be a totally inappropriate thing
to ask but you don't happen to have a
letter from the last day or two that you
consider reading all are in power other
and how long they are ok so here's one
so I was panicking because I want to
offer my apartment in New York to do a
woman who's a CO vid 19 nurse who's
volunteered to come into New York City
to help and I'm afraid that I'll infect
my neighbors um if I let her come and
stay there though I was up in the middle
of the night thinking ethically is it is
it appropriate for me to do this
um though I wrote I need you and love
said I'm right here and and then I said
I want to offer that kovat nineteen
nerves in my apartment but I'm afraid
that my name was look infected and I'm
scared and I don't know what the right
move is help me and love said I don't
actually know what the right answer to
that is but I'm with you and I said but
what do you think I should do and love
said why don't you just sit with me
right here for a minute and be with me
and know that you're held no matter what
that you cannot make the wrong choice
that it doesn't matter in the grand
scheme of things you're my beloved I've
got you I can see how much you're
spinning I can see how tired you are and
it doesn't matter to me whether you make
this decision in the next minute and the
next day or not at all I'm with you and
I'll sit with you through this entire
thing and I'll love you no matter what
you decide to do at the end of this I
will be just as much with you at the end
of this decision as I am with you now
and then I'll say I said so what do you
think I should do and love says I think
you should go get a glass of water and I
think you should lay down and get some
rest and we'll talk about it some more
and more what I have found over the
years of writing myself these letters
from love is that love never gives
advice this is actually really good for
all of you who love to give unsolicited
advice to people love never gives advice
beyond why don't you get a glass of
water why don't you rest
why don't you we'll try this again
tomorrow you're doing your best this is
a hard time and I've got you so that's
like I've got 20 years of those done for
those journals and I'm assuming that I'm
gonna need it
for the rest of my life wow that was I
don't know how to nothing that I think
we might be done I think I can't anymore
after that
how beautiful good good grief let's go
you're really you're really phenomenal
you've just got this unique way of
articulating what others can't
articulate and that you've brought all
of us to very tender intimate and place
and thank you for that thank you Thank
You Helen take care of yourselves
everybody and
we're right here with each other through
this we can do this thank you this
goodbye thank you yeah no that was
special I was special to me I hope I
know that you're on a different
circumstances online and that there are
so many so many elements to this thing
there the you know there's the problems
that those of us who are isolated have
and in many ways those are the luxurious
problems and we're really aware of that
but there's still problems and and we're
going to give space on these Ted
connects to many other voices as well I
think we're hoping to you next week from
a doctor at the front line a voice from
India we hope on some of the horrifying
things that are happening there and and
also some pretty amazing proposals for
how the world could come out of this
like specific proposals and how we get
past this period of lockdown
to bring back the economy or all of this
one of this matters so I guess we want
we want and everyone to come back
calendar this share with friends and
help us figure out how to invest I also
wanted to flag that I don't know if you
were able to tune in for Susan David's
conversation earlier in the week we have
launched a new podcast with Susan that
launched on Monday we're calling it
checking in with Susan David and she's
going to be sharing kind of daily tips
on how to deal with this pandemic and so
you can find that wherever you find
podcasts in this day and age for this
conversation we will be archiving it
it'll be on Facebook and we'll also put
it onto Ted calm you can find the into
Ted interview podcast that Chris and Liz
did last year which I confess just made
me weep or too long you can find that at
goto.com slash Ted Connect but that's it
from us and tomorrow I want to flag that
we have a very special treat
which is less chat more beauty we will
be joined by the unbelievably talented
butterscotch who is a beatboxer and a
singer and a musician and a sage and an
all-around delight and she is going to
be giving us a glimpse into her world
and delighting us all with some sonic
deliciousness though do tune in tomorrow
thanks so much everyone
we're in this together they safe dear
soon do you soon be well